---
published: false
---
## Inversion of control from the history of political diplomacy

I think I found earliest example of inversion of control principle.

Context: In _1885_ an Austrian parlament held a session to disqus a military conflict in the Balkan between Serbia and Bulgaria over some Turkish land. Austria was an ally of Serbia and Russia was an ally of Bulgaria.

A parlament member asked minister of foreign affairs count Kálnoky a question whether Austria is determined to defend Serbia's interest under any circumstances?

> Austria can not defend interests of Serbia under any circumstances. **Doing that she would make her politic dependent upon one much smaller country**, who besides that does not give enough assurance that "it would not be governed by impulses but by reasoning".

Moving forward 30 years later.

If you think a little bit WW1 all started because they _violated this principle_. Everyone was connected to everyone through network of interlocking [alliances](https://www.iwm.org.uk/history/what-you-need-to-know-about-pre-first-world-war-alliances) and because of this, assasination of prince Ferdinand event was not localised between Serbia and Austria and it caused a havoc in Europe 1918. For our purposes we can say that WW2 also started this way althought not quite true.

So the next time you violate IOC principle be aware of the consequences it had.

Adendum:
If country is entity, and alliance is coupling, what is alliance's purpose? It seems it is to defend vital interest of country for survival and only in that circumstances coupling is allowed. What is an analogy in software?
## A New Post

Enter text in [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/). Use the toolbar above, or click the **?** button for formatting help.
