---
published: true
layout: post
title: Dependency inversion principle from history
category: posts
---

I think I found earliest example of inversion of control/dependency inversion principle.

Context: In _1885_ an Austrian parlament held a session to disqus a military conflict in the Balkan between Serbia and Bulgaria over some Turkish land caused by some unbalanced serbian king. At that time Austria was an ally of Serbia and Russia was an ally of Bulgaria.

Everyone in Austria was eager to help Serbia because enemies Russians where on the other side. A parlament member asked minister of foreign affairs count Kálnoky a question whether Austria is determined to defend Serbia's interest under any circumstances?

> _Austria can not defend interests of Serbia under any circumstances. **Doing that she would make her politics dependent upon one much smaller country**, who besides that does not give enough assurance that "it would not be governed by impulses but by reasoning"._


If you think a little bit WW1 and WW2 started because of _violation of this principle_. Everyone was connected to everyone through network of interlocking [alliances](https://www.iwm.org.uk/history/what-you-need-to-know-about-pre-first-world-war-alliances). Assasination of prince Ferdinand was not localised between Serbia and Austria and it caused a havoc in Europe 1918 since when Austria declared war to Serbia that triggered the domino effect. For our purposes we can say that WW2 also started this way, althought not quite true.

So the next time you violate IOC principle be aware of the consequences it had.

Adendum:
If country is entity, and alliance is coupling, what is alliance's purpose? It seems it is to defend vital interest of country for survival and only in that circumstances coupling is allowed. What is an analogy in software?
